README.md, before:

# Equivalency

## Focus on the differences that matter.

Equivalency lets you declaratively define rules for string equivalence.

- Several useful rules are provided out of the box, for example, Unicode
  normalization, capitalization, common puncutation and diacritical marks.
- Custom rules can be created using plain strings, regexes, or functions.
- Comparing two strings via an equivalency returns whether the two strings are
  equivalent according to that equivalency's ruleset, and can optionally
  return
  - the edit distance between the two fully transformed strings using the
  [damerau-levenshtein](https://www.npmjs.com/package/damerau-levenshtein)
  algorithm
  - reasons why the strings differ
- Equivalency instances can be cloned, making it easy to start with a root
  equivalency that takes care of universal concerns like Unicode
  normalization, then derive more specific equivalencies that are tailored to
  specific cases, like case- or punctuation-sensitivity.

Equivalency works in both Node and browsers back as far as IE 11 ([full list
of supported browsers](./.browserslistrc)).

## Usage

```js
const checker = require('equivalency');
const { Equivalency } = checker;

// Default rule is byte-equality.
checker.compare('a', 'a');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('a', 'A');
// { isEquivalent: false }

// Specify which differences matter/don't matter.
checker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.CAPITALIZATION);
checker.compare('a', 'A');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('Hot-dog', 'hotdog');
// { isEquivalent: false }

checker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.en.COMMON_PUNCTUATION);
checker.compare('Hot-dog', 'hotdog');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.matters(',;');
checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!');
// { isEquivalent: false }

checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!',{giveReasons: true});
// { isEquivalent: false, reasons: [{name: ',;'}] }

// Return edit distance
const options = { calculateEditDistance: true };
checker.compare('show', 'shoe', options);
// { isEquivalent: false, editDistance: 1 }

const esChecker = new Equivalency();
esChecker.compare('adiós', 'adios');
// { isEquivalent: false }

const enChecker = new Equivalency();
enChecker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.ACCENTS);
enChecker.compare('adiós', 'adios');
// { isEquivalent: true }

// Root equivalency: normalizes Unicode, whitespace differences, and case.
const root = new Equivalency()
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.UNICODE_NORMALIZATION)
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.WHITESPACE_DIFFERENCES)
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.CAPITALIZATION)

// Diacritic-blind equivalency cloned from root equivalency.
const equivalencyForDiacriticWarning = root
  .clone()
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.COMMON_DIACRITICS);

const isMatch = root.compare(
  providedAnswer,
  expectedAnswer
).isEquivalent;

const isMatchExceptForDiacritics = equivalencyForDiacriticWarning.compare(
  providedAnswer,
  expectedAnswer
).isEquivalent;
```

## Tests

[![BrowserStack
Status](https://www.browserstack.com/automate/badge.svg?badge_key=b1pkZFN2ejJFVzFDZHhNeHUydk9HSlRxUUk1M1ZGRzZidDZKUU9NTksxdz0tLUI2MFRlazFhUW8rQU82MmxTMDdvNUE9PQ==--c1cd245939097acf9f1b9399a2db0661b6738e7d)](https://www.browserstack.com/automate/public-build/b1pkZFN2ejJFVzFDZHhNeHUydk9HSlRxUUk1M1ZGRzZidDZKUU9NTksxdz0tLUI2MFRlazFhUW8rQU82MmxTMDdvNUE9PQ==--c1cd245939097acf9f1b9399a2db0661b6738e7d)

### Running tests

- local: `yarn test`
- Browserstack (for browser compatability, particular IE 11): `BROWSER_STACK_ACCESS_KEY=<key> yarn run test:karma`

## Release steps

See [the release doc](./docs/release.md).

Commit message:

Add documentation on rule application order

README.md, after:

# Equivalency

## Focus on the differences that matter.

Equivalency lets you declaratively define rules for string equivalence.

- Several useful rules are provided out of the box, for example, Unicode
  normalization, capitalization, common puncutation and diacritical marks.
- Custom rules can be created using plain strings, regexes, or functions.
- Comparing two strings via an equivalency returns whether the two strings are
  equivalent according to that equivalency's ruleset, and can optionally
  return
  - the edit distance between the two fully transformed strings using the
  [damerau-levenshtein](https://www.npmjs.com/package/damerau-levenshtein)
  algorithm
  - reasons why the strings differ
- Equivalency instances can be cloned, making it easy to start with a root
  equivalency that takes care of universal concerns like Unicode
  normalization, then derive more specific equivalencies that are tailored to
  specific cases, like case- or punctuation-sensitivity.

Equivalency works in both Node and browsers back as far as IE 11 ([full list
of supported browsers](./.browserslistrc)).

## Usage

```js
const checker = require('equivalency');
const { Equivalency } = checker;

// Default rule is byte-equality.
checker.compare('a', 'a');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('a', 'A');
// { isEquivalent: false }

// Specify which differences matter/don't matter.
checker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.CAPITALIZATION);
checker.compare('a', 'A');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('Hot-dog', 'hotdog');
// { isEquivalent: false }

checker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.en.COMMON_PUNCTUATION);
checker.compare('Hot-dog', 'hotdog');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!');
// { isEquivalent: true }

checker.matters(',;');
checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!');
// { isEquivalent: false }

checker.compare('Go away, fly!', 'Go away; fly!',{giveReasons: true});
// { isEquivalent: false, reasons: [{name: ',;'}] }

// Return edit distance
const options = { calculateEditDistance: true };
checker.compare('show', 'shoe', options);
// { isEquivalent: false, editDistance: 1 }

const esChecker = new Equivalency();
esChecker.compare('adiós', 'adios');
// { isEquivalent: false }

const enChecker = new Equivalency();
enChecker.doesntMatter(Equivalency.ACCENTS);
enChecker.compare('adiós', 'adios');
// { isEquivalent: true }

// Root equivalency: normalizes Unicode, whitespace differences, and case.
const root = new Equivalency()
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.UNICODE_NORMALIZATION)
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.WHITESPACE_DIFFERENCES)
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.CAPITALIZATION)

// Diacritic-blind equivalency cloned from root equivalency.
const equivalencyForDiacriticWarning = root
  .clone()
  .doesntMatter(Equivalency.COMMON_DIACRITICS);

const isMatch = root.compare(
  providedAnswer,
  expectedAnswer
).isEquivalent;

const isMatchExceptForDiacritics = equivalencyForDiacriticWarning.compare(
  providedAnswer,
  expectedAnswer
).isEquivalent;
```

Equivalency Rules are not applied strictly in the order they are supplied. All map rules are applied, and only then
are function rules applied. Therefore, FunctionRules can apply transformations on top of MapRule transformations, but
MapRules cannot apply transformations on top of FunctionRules. These two rule types are also applied in fundamentally
different ways. MapRules are collapsed into a single map which is then used to transform the comparison strings in a
single operation. When two MapRules have conflicting mappings, the mappings in the rule further down the rule chain
takes precedence. FunctionRules cascade such that transformation operations are performed individually one after another
in the order given.

## Tests

[![BrowserStack
Status](https://www.browserstack.com/automate/badge.svg?badge_key=b1pkZFN2ejJFVzFDZHhNeHUydk9HSlRxUUk1M1ZGRzZidDZKUU9NTksxdz0tLUI2MFRlazFhUW8rQU82MmxTMDdvNUE9PQ==--c1cd245939097acf9f1b9399a2db0661b6738e7d)](https://www.browserstack.com/automate/public-build/b1pkZFN2ejJFVzFDZHhNeHUydk9HSlRxUUk1M1ZGRzZidDZKUU9NTksxdz0tLUI2MFRlazFhUW8rQU82MmxTMDdvNUE9PQ==--c1cd245939097acf9f1b9399a2db0661b6738e7d)

### Running tests

- local: `yarn test`
- Browserstack (for browser compatability, particular IE 11): `BROWSER_STACK_ACCESS_KEY=<key> yarn run test:karma`

## Release steps

See [the release doc](./docs/release.md).
